Two others and I were interested in the criminal justice system, and wanted to tackle a problem of significance by leveraging what we had learned about natural language understanding. So, we collaborated with Ph.D. students in Stanford's CS Dept. and legal researchers at Yale who were already focused on California parole board hearings of former juvenile offenders. To find what niche we could carve out, we looked toward what our mentor (and former TA) Rob Voight had done in his dissertation--namely, racial disparities in the respect that Oakland PD officers verbally gave to drivers pulled over in traffic stops.

We thought that we, too, could look at features of respect in the parole board hearing setting. To do so, we analyzed roughly over 1.6 million sentences corresponding to ~500 parole board hearing transcripts along features related to apologizing, asking and giving agency, gratitude, and the use of first and last names, to name a few. Originally, I worked on overt displays of power (see ODPs, ODP.py), and trained a classifier to featurize the sentences. However, we found that the source material for training the ODP featurizer--namely, a boss-worker relationship--did not translate well to a courtroom setting where a power dynamic is highly formalized and structural. So, we decided to omit the use of ODPs (ended up using a proxy in the number of the times the first and last names were said, which wasn't very predictive unfortunately), and focus primarily on features of respect and features drawn from the LIWC dataset/lexicon. Using the features, and playing with several models, we were able to predict the outcome of the parole board hearing (parole granted/denied) with 87% accuracy, which we felt happy with, given that it was better than chance (there was a denial of parole rate of 68%).

We also performed a regression prediction task in the cases where parole was denied (given that parole board members have to set a year amount until the inmate can apply for parole again). In our documents, we saw that the minimum time for parole denial was 1 more year, and a maximum of fifteen years. Using the same features above, we trained a classifier that could predict the length of denial within a range of a little over 2 years of the true denial of parole time. This, we felt, was less successful, but likely due to needing either stronger features or more documents of parole denial (or both).
